tipos de movimientos del alma: pasios, acciones, adquirir aretai (technai, episteme, etc.).
.. cada uno tiene un fin (las pasios fin orgánico [eg liberar hormonas], pero subordinado al existencial: [preservar la vida y dar lugar a virtudes].

. tenía separados los conceptos en categ: bien-phusis-conceptos, y bien-phusis-tipos_bien_natural-psuche-conceptos.
.. mejor todos en una categ, y también marcar la otra (eg al hablar de la virtud en gral-origen y ejemplificar con templanza y coraje se marca concepto, y psuche-).

// esto sería las hojas del arbol temático (los significados que tienen asociados, vs just valoracion temática).



==
Libro I


. chap1
.. alta fuerza de chunk, definiciones ok del bien, y los teloi.
.. b-preciso que BY NZ deseamos el bien... más tarde ahondará en que la phusis no produce, no es la causa de la felicidad (el origen seguro que sí)... el deseo del bien y el camino de la virtud (max-vi el logos, aprender, cultivar la psuche, orden en pasios, adquirir aretai<= ganar en estabilidad personal y comunitaria... eu-zen... felicidad) es lo que conduce a la felicidad (encontrarse en la mejor actividad [praxeos], adquiriendo y fortaleciendo virtudes con vistas a realizar el max-bien, ie, vivir according to phusis).


. chap2:
.. chief-good (el fin último que se busca for its own sake, y al que los demás fines en ultima instancia remiten)... jerarquia de bienes <= fines.
.. la ciencia politica se ocupa de estudiar ese bien y su realización: what is good for a people or for cities is a nobler and more godlike thing... ek es parte de cc politica.
.... Knowledge of the good would seem to be the concern of the most authoritative science, the highest master science... Jerarquía de ciencias.
.... since political science employs the other sciences, and also lays down laws about what we should do and refrain from, its end will include the ends of the others, and will therefore be the human good.


. chap3:
. poca vi de los chunks y w-dependientes entre sí (at best aclarativo de otros chunks).
. grado de precision de c-ciencia.
. da sdo del bien natural político (extiende chap2, qué estudia la politica, su lugar entre las ciencias, etc.): The spheres of what is noble and what is just, which political science examines.
.. caracteriza los bienes de la esfera politica (w-dependientes de contexto, interpretaciones, etc., w-subjetivo todo, cada uno con sus ideas acerca del max-bien, de qué movimientos realizar para realizarlos, etc., normalmente totalmente off the mark, aunque es normal que lisiado valore en exceso caminar y solitario una flia)... , admit of a good deal of diversity and variation, so that they seem to exist only by convention and not by nature... arbol: convenciones / nomos vs phusis! a los idiotas (que siguen sus opiniones y sentimientos) no les sirve intentar aprender lo que enseña la ciencia politica, por más que ese conocimiento sea max-vi en sí mismo.
.. toca tema de referencias acerca de la etica (ek forma parte de la ciencia política).


. chap4
.. hay referencialidad (vs platon por tema de logica). en arbol: ref externa y ciencia logica.
.. sigue con ciencia politica: aim of political science: of all the good things to be done, what is the highest... aunque se está refiriendo a psuche, ie, eudaimonia.
.. again subjetismo de masas (y sofistas!)
.. se toca tema de hexeis (en gral sin entrar en ninguna virtud): anyone who is going to be a competent student in the spheres of what is noble and what is just --in a word, politics-- must be brought up well in HIS habits.


. chap5
.. concepciones sobre eudaimoni (again) hoi polloi (placer, riqueza y fama-honor)
.. tipos de vida: life of enjoyment, life of politics and life of contemplation (vidas contemplativas=>much virtue por gran estabilidad y abnegación que requiere).
.. evaluacion de bienes como el propio de la ciencia politca / fin de la vida politica (por ahora cc plt = ek)... evalua segun si el bien en cuestion es buscado en si mismo o para obtener otro bien (aconseja seeing as ends the things mentioned before, para apreciar si se las busca por sí mismas o no).
.... life of enjoyment descartada de una (propia de animales).
.... honor no alcanza (los que buscan honor son los hombre de acción, w-vinculados con la politica). En arbol va marcado en bienes naturales --> aparentes --> honor (bien aparente es el que excede la justa medida, en su justa medida son w-vi para la adquisicion de virtudes y felicidad).
.... evalua virtud: b-ok, pero se puede ser virtuoso y padecer calamidades, incluso al dormir la virtud no cuenta. evalua y descarta riqueza medio fuera de lugar (debería ir antes de honor).
.... life of contemplation: ? (pospone su evaluacion).


. chap6
.. vs pt (estudiar lo universal, ie, argumento metafisico no logico como la anterior referencia).
.. teorizacion acerca del bien (arbol vs jerarquias): the good is spoken of in the categories of substance, of quality and of relation; and that which exists in itself, namely, substance, is naturally prior to what is relative (since this seems like an offshoot and attribute of what is). So there could not be some common Form over and above these goods.
.... good is spoken of in as many senses as is being: it is used in the category of substance, as for instance God and intellect, in that of quality (the virtues), in that of quantity (the right amount), in that of relation (the useful), in that of time (the right moment), and in that of place (the right locality), and so on.
.... again vs plato: there could not be one common universal (it would be spoken of not in all the categories, but in only one). Agrega pitagóricos (b-mejor que platonicos).
.. things should be called good in two senses: things good in themselves, and things good for the sake of things good in themselves (arbol: al ppio, y phusis->conceptos->telos->tipo (por_otro, por_si)).
.... class of things good in themselves: understanding (φρονεῖν), sight, certain types of pleasure, and honours (no 100% for_themselves, pero ok igual categorizar asi: as sight is good in the body, so intellect is in the soul, and so on in other cases... chap7: things worth choosing both in themselves and for the sake of another end).
.. el pto del chunk es vs pt: There is therefore no common good answering to a single Form.
.. seeking precision in these matters would be more appropriate to another area of philosophy... en praxis (ciencia politica) nos ocupamos de objects of action or things attainable by a human being.


. chap7 (chunks vi al final)
.. retoma cuestion del bien propio de la ciencia politica.
.... again: bien de cada ciencia y techne... again: in every action and rational choice the end is the good, since it is for the sake of the end that everyone does everything else.
.... fines intermedios son bienes incompletos, pero  the chief good manifestly is something complete [τὸ δ᾽ ἄριστον τέλειόν τι φαίνεται]... if there is only one end that is complete (τέλειον), this will be what we are looking for, and if there are several of them, the most complete.
.. Happiness in particular is believed to be complete without qualification, since we always choose it for itself and never for the sake of {1097b} anything else.
.... elegimos virtudes por si mismas, pero + porque through them we shall live a life of happiness.
.. the complete good is thought to be self-sufficient.
.... For now, we take what is self-sufficient to be that which on its own (μονούμενον) makes life worthy of choice and lacking in nothing.
.... Happiness, then, is obviously something complete and self- sufficient, in that it is the end of what is done
.. ergon argument: just as the good --the doing well (τὸ εὖ)-- of a flute-player, a sculptor or any practitioner of a skill, or generally whatever has some characteristic activity or action, is thought to lie in its characteristic activity, so the same would seem to be true of a human being, if indeed he has a characteristic activity.
.... phusis es quien da el ergon a cada ente: Has nature left him without a characteristic activity to perform?
.... evalua candidatos para el ergon del ser humano. No life of nurishment and grow (comparte con plantas y bestias), NO sentient life (comparte co bestias). What remains is a life, concerned in some way with action, of the element that possesses reason.
.... we are talking about the life concerned with action in the sense of activity (κατ᾽ ἐνέργειαν).
.... the characteristic activity of a human being is an activity of the soul in accordance with reason... the human good turns out to be activity of the soul in accordance with virtue, and if there are several virtues, in accordance with the best and most complete... and this must be over a complete life.
.. aclara que esto es un rough outline (por ahora es suficiente).
.. arbol: toca tema de la precision de las ciencias.
.... toca tema también de los archai.


. chap8
.. considerar las opiniones de hoi polloi.
.... traducción dice que: But we must consider the first principle (sería el primer ppio de la cc plt).
.. all the data (πάντα ὑπάρχοντα) harmonize (συνᾴδει) with the truth, but soon clash with falsity.
.. categ de bienes: externos, body & soul (categorizacion nueva).
.... Goods have been classified into three groups: those called external goods, goods of the soul (actions and activities), and goods of the body. El fin de la cc plt es un bien del alma (pre estado etico).
.... the happy person lives well and acts well... all the things that people look for in happiness appear to have been included in our account.
.... Our account of happiness is in harmony with those who say that happiness is virtue or some particular virtue, since activity in accordance with virtue is characteristic of virtue
.. arbol: posesión vs uso: it makes a great difference whether we conceive of the chief good as consisting in possession or in use, that is to say, in a state or in an activity (ἕξει ἢ ἐνεργείᾳ): poseer un bien no implica producir bienes (dormir o dedicado a otra ocupacion)... it is those who act rightly who will attain what is noble and good (poseyendo virtudes además de actuar, así se producen bienes).
.. arbol:efectos_eudaimonia: the life of these people is pleasurable in itself (a person with virtue finds pleasure in what accords with virtue [como quien ama los caballos siente placer en los caballos]).
.... actions in accordance with virtue are pleasant in themselves, but they are also good and noble as well.
.. arbol: x nz: The pleasures of the masses, because they are not pleasant by nature, conflict with one another, but the pleasures of those who are fond of noble things are pleasant by nature.
.. arbol happiness intensivo: Happiness, then, is the best, the noblest and the pleasantest thing, and these qualities are not separate.
.... as we suggested, happiness obviously needs the presence of external goods as well.
.. arbol: vs_blessedness: makarion vs happiness (aun perdiendo todo se puede maximizar virtudes, pero w-dificil ser feliz en esas circunstancias).


. chap9
.. causa: Hence the problem also arises of whether happiness is to be acquired by learning, habituation, or some other training, or whether it comes by divine dispensation (θείαν μοῖραν) or even by chance.
.... evalua if god-given... Even if it is not sent by the gods, however, but arises through virtue and some sort of learning or training, it is evidently one of the most divine things.
.... lo mejor es adquirir por phusis y por proceso de adquisicion de bienes intermedios (arbol!): if it is better to be happy (εὐδαιμονεῖν) in this way than by chance, it is reasonable that happiness should be attained like this. For what is in accordance with nature is by nature as noble as it can be.
.. gran resumen: And this agrees with what we said at the beginning. We took the end of political science to be the chief good, and political science is concerned most of all with producing citizens of a certain kind, namely, those who are both good and the sort to perform noble actions.
.... por esto ni animales ni niños pueden ser felices (pero sí blessed los niños, por tener la capacidad:dunamis de ser felices).
.. gran resumen felicidad: happiness requires complete virtue and a complete life.
.... buena ejemplificacion (priamo 'feliz' hasta ancianidad, pero un segundo el mas infeliz).


. chap10 (progresion argumental b-avanzada, priorizar estos chunks)
.. retoma ejemplificacion: w-ko esperar hasta muerte para predicar felicidad (grado de precision de c-ciencia! no es matemática esto, con cierta cantidad de signos alcanza para juicio w-ok).
.... toca tema de blessedness vs happiness.
.... def ok de happiness: happiness is understood as something permanent (μόνιμόν) and not at all liable to change (εὐμετάβολον).
.. no interesa tanto lo fortuito de los vaivenes de la vida para atribuir felicidad: What really matter (κύριαι) for happiness are activities in accordance with virtue, and for the contrary of happiness the contrary kind of activities (ie, cómo responde a misfortunes).
.... nothing in the sphere of human achievement has more permanence than activities in accordance with virtue... the blessed spend their lives engaged, quite continually, in them above all.
.. teorizacion sobre chance: Many things, however, both large and small, happen by chance.
.... si es de importancia el acontecimiento y sus efectos alteran 'the balance of life', e impiden la realizacion de activities (energeias), sí hay que tener en cuenta a la chance... Nevertheless, even in their midst what is noble shines through, when a person calmly bears many great misfortunes (ocasión para adquirir o fortalacer virtudes, en este caso μεγαλόψυχος).
.... if activities are, as we have said, what really matter in life, no one blessed could become wretched, since he will never do hateful and petty a actions.
.... if this is so, the happy person could never become wretched, though he will not be blessed if he meets with luck like that of Priam.
-este tema da para chunk sintetico: chance, happiness (definido como activity + virtud) y blessedness (se puede sumar como apendice o para repreguntas el tema del bien-fin y la phusis)-
.. definicion ok: What is to prevent us, then, from concluding that the happy person is the one who, adequately furnished with external goods, engages in activities in accordance with complete virtue, not for just any period of time but over a complete life?


. chap11
.. again misfortunes después de muerto, con outline + q suficiente (arbol grado de precision de c-ciencia)
.. So when friends do well, and likewise when they do badly, it does seem to have some effect on the dead. But it is of such a nature and degree as neither to make not happy those who are happy, nor anything like that


. chap12
.. let us consider whether happiness is a thing to be praised or instead something to be honoured (no es una dunamis mas)
.... praise is indeed appropriate to virtue, since it makes us the kind of people to perform noble actions; eulogies (ἐγκώμια), however, are bestowed on what is achieved (τῶν ἔργων).
.. happiness vs blessedness.
.. buena definicion: happiness is something honourable and complete.
.. otra buena definicion de arkhe: being a first principle. It is for the sake of this this we all do all the rest of our actions, and the first principle and cause of goods we take to be something honourable and divine.


. chap13
.. again definicion de felicidad: happiness is a certain kind of activity of the soul in accordance with complete virtue.
.. avance para estudiar virtudes.
.. conexion vaga con political science... politicos deben estudiar el alma (como oftalmologo medicina gral).
.... The politician, then, must consider the soul, and consider it with a view to understanding virtue.
.... again grado de precision de c-ciencia.
.. By human virtue, we mean that of the soul, not that of the body; and happiness we speak of as an activity of the soul (alma vs cuerpo, todavia no partes del alma): By human virtue, we mean that of the soul, not that of the body; and happiness we speak of as an activity of the soul.
.. partes del alma (logon y alogon [vegetativa: nutrition and growth, sensitiva: appetite (tiene a share in reason)]).
.... Let us leave the nutritive capacity aside, since by nature it plays no role (ἄμοιρον) in human virtue.
.... parte apetitiva se opone a reason, pero in so far as it listens to and obeys it, it is in some way persuaded by reason (esta parte es w-diferente en el virtuoso).
.. las virtudes se dividen de la misma manera: Some virtues we say are intellectual, such as wisdom, judgement and practical wisdom, while others are virtues of character, such as generosity and temperance.
.... definicion de virtud: we do praise the wise person for his state (ἕξιν), and the states worthy of praise we call virtues.


==
Libro II

. chap1 (chunk vi)
.. virtudes dianoeticas (intelectuales) owe their origin and development mainly to teaching, for which reason its attainment requires experience and time; virtue of character is a result of habituation.
.... none of the virtues of character arises in us by nature (nothing natural can be made to behave differently by habituation). Buen ejemplo. virtues arise in us neither by nature nor contrary to nature, but nature gives us the capacity to acquire them, and completion comes through habituation.
.... arbol: bien-phusis-tipos_bien_natural-psuche-conceptos-virtud-origin.
.... in all the cases where something arises in us by nature, we first acquire the capacities (δυνάμεις) and later exhibit the activities (vision para ver)... Virtues, however, we acquire (λαμβάνομεν) by first exercising them (aprender a construir construyendo)... esto es max-vi para el curso, estudiantes tienen que tomar así y empezar a realizar actividades virtuosas (sobre todo en lo politico, hay que adquirir virtudes!!).
.... we become just by doing just actions, temperate by temperate actions, and courageous by courageous actions. What happens in cities bears this out as well,  because legislators make the citizens good by habituating them (ἐθίζοντες), and this is what every legislator intends. 
.... virtudes se enseñan... adquirir hábitos que definen la conducta en ciertas situaciones... anticipo de paideia!
.. como skills (construir, deportista), virtudes se adquieren y si pierden por las mismas actividades (actuar ok frente a miedo=>coraje, mal=>cobarde... frente a pasios (deletite esp): ok=>templanza o destemplanza, etc.)... by acting as we do in our dealings with other men, some of us become just, others unjust... by becoming habituated to feeling fear or confidence, some of us become courageous, others cowardly.
.... the resulting hexeis depende de la respuesta en esas situaciones... like states arise from like activities.
.... arbor justo medio (de modo anticipatorio).
.. arbol good political system vs bad one.


. chap2
.. it is not in order to acquire knowledge that we are considering what virtue is, but to become good people (igual en chap4 dice qué es la virtud).
.... arbol: bien-pneuma-ciencia-ciencias-px-ek&finalidad
.. again: our actions (πράξεις) are responsible for our states of character (ἕξεις) developing in one way or another (=> max-vi estudiar para enseñar ok habituation).
.. The idea of acting in accordance with right reason is a generally accepted one (más adelante la estudiaremos por ahora taken for granted).
.. again grado de precision de c-ciencia... the spheres of actions and of what is good for us have nothing fixed about them... agents (πράττοντας) must always look at what is appropriate in each case as it happens (ctx, intenciones siempre max-vi).
.. doctrina del justo_medio (arbol: bien-phusis-conceptos-justo_medio)
.... se aplica tanto a salud (ko extremos de no comer y de comer demasiado, ok lo adecuado a orthos logos), como a las virtudes eticas: too much exercise and too little ruin (φθείρει: destroy) one's strength, and likewise too much food and drink and too little ruin one's health, while the right amount produces, increases and preserves it... lo mismo con hexeis (coraje, templanza and the others).
.... By abstaining from pleasures we become temperate, and having become so we are most able to abstain from them (not only are the sources and causes of their origination and growth the same as those of their destruction, but also the sphere of their actualization will be the same). Idem reacción frente al miedo.


. chap3
.. virtue of character is concerned with pleasures and pains (si no hay gozo en abstenerse de placeres fuera de lugar no se es templado, idem gozo al enfrentar miedos para valiente).
.... virtues are to do with actions and situations of being affected (πάθη), and pleasure and pain follow from every action and situation of being affected.
.... It is because of pleasures and pains that people become bad -- through pursuing or avoiding the wrong ones, or at the wrong time, or in the wrong manner, or in any other of the various ways distinguished by reason.
.... again: every state of the soul is naturally related to, and concerned with, the kind of things by which it is naturally made better or worse.
.... punishment (pain inflicted) is a kind of cure, and cures are effected by contraries.
.. It is for this reason that we need to have been brought up in a particular way from our early days, as Plato (cf. Rep., 401e) says, so we might find enjoyment or pain in the right things.
.... arbol: enseñanza! plato, virtud teorica (bien-phusis-conceptos-virtud), virtudes[templanza, coraje], pasiones... (bien-phusis-tipos_bien_natural-psuche-conceptos-enseñanza-paideia).
.... virtue will be the sort of state to do the best actions in connection with pleasures and pains, and vice the contrary.

.. three objects of choice (αἱρέσεις).
.... the noble (καλοῦ), the useful, and the pleasant -- and three of avoidance -- their contraries, the shameful, the harmful, and the painful.
.... in respect of all of these, especially pleasure, the good person tends to go right, and the bad person to go wrong.
.. continúa hablando sobre el placer... Our whole inquiry, then, must be concerned with them (pleasure and pain)... the whole concern of virtue and political science is pleasures and pains!
.. ultimo párrafo: resumen sobre virtud.


. chap4
.. reflexion sobre los dicho (becoming just requires doing just actions first).
.. cualidades del agente para que acción sea virtuosa: vs productos de tchLK: the products of the skills have their worth within themselves, so it is enough for them to be turned out with a certain quality.  But actions done in accordance with virtues are done in a just or temperate way not merely by having some quality of their own, but rather if the agent acts in a certain state, namely, first, with knowledge, secondly, from rational choice, and rational choice of the actions for their own sake, and, thirdly, from a firm and unshakeable character.
.... Actions, then, are called just and temperate when they are such as the just and the temperate person would do... no es suficiente con hacer acciones tipificadas por imitación.
.. vs hoi polloi: But the masses do not do them.


. chap5
.. ti estin arete!! 
.. there are three things to be found in the soul -- so virtue should be one of these. We are praised and blamed on the basis of our virtues and vices... we become angry or afraid without rational choice, while the virtues are rational choices or at any rate involve rational choice. And we are not called either good or bad, nor are we praised or blamed, through being capable of experiencing things (=> not dunameis).
.... feelings (πάθη): appetite, anger, fear, confidence, envy, joy, love, hate, longing, emulation, pity, and in general things accompanied by pleasure or pain.
.... capacities (δυνάμεις): things on the basis of which we are described as being capable of experiencing these feelings -- on the basis of which, for example, we are described as capable of feeling anger, fear or pity.
.... states (ἕξεις): things in respect of which we are well or badly disposed in relation to feelings. If, for example, in relation to anger, we feel it too much or too little, we are badly disposed; but if we are between the two, then well disposed.
.. So if the virtues are neither feelings nor capacities, it remains that they are states.


. chap6
.. But we must say not just that virtue is a state, but what kind of state.
.... ergon argument: it is through the virtue of the eye that we see well. The virtue of a human being too will be the state that makes a human being good and makes him perform his characteristic activity well. Every virtue causes that of which it is a virtue to be in a good state, and to perform its characteristic activity well.
.. the mean in itself (mth) vs the mean relative to us (nos interesa este último en la px).
.... I am talking here about virtue of character, since it is this that is concerned with feelings and actions, and it is in these that we find excess, deficiency and the mean.
.... feelings: fear, confidence, appetite, anger, pity, and in general pleasure and pain can be experienced too much or too little, and in both ways not well. But to have them at the right time, about the right things, towards the right people, for the right end, and in the right way, is the mean and best; and this is the business of virtue.
.... actions: there is an excess, a deficiency and a mean in actions.
.... virtue, then, is a kind of mean, at least in the sense that it is the sort of thing that is able to hit a mean.
.. Virtue, then, is a state involving rational choice, consisting in a mean relative to us and determined by reason -- the reason, that is, by reference to which the practically wise person would determine it.


. chap7
.. But this general account on its own is not enough. We must also apply it to particular cases, because though more general discussions of actions are of wider application, particular ones are more genuine.
.... enum una x una las virtudes (exceso, mean:virtud, defecto).


. chap8
.. of these three dispositions, then, two are vices and the third, the mean, is virtue.
.... sigue con justo_medio.

.
chap9
.. one of the extremes is a greater missing of the mark, the other less so.
.... tener en cuenta nuestras tendencias: we shall arrive at the mean by holding far off from where we would miss the mark (alejarse más de ese extremo).



==
Libro III

. chap1
.. voluntad (things that happen by force or through ignorance are thought to be involuntary, actos bajo amenaza o forzado por situación, eg, tirar carga por tormenta, es b-discutible).
.... recall: virtue is to do with feelings and actions.
.... virtue is to do with feelings and actions, and since voluntary feelings and actions are praised and blamed, while the involuntary ones are pardoned and occasionally even pitied... anyone considering virtue must determine the limits of the voluntary and the involuntary. It will be useful as well for legislators, in connection with honours and punishments.
.... in actions like this the first principle of moving the limbs that serve as instruments lies in him; and where the first principle lies in a person, it is in his power to act or not to act. Such actions are therefore voluntary, but, without qualification, they are presumably involuntary, since no one would choose any of them in itself.
.... they seem more like voluntary ones, because at the time they are done they are worthy of choice, and the end of an action depends on the circumstances.
.... It is nevertheless hard sometimes to determine what should be chosen at what cost, and what should be endured for what gain... It is not easy, however, to explain what sort of things ought to be chosen in return for what, since there are many differences in particulars.
.. again: What is forced, then, seems to be what has an external first principle, where the person forced contributes nothing.
.... again: since what is involuntary is what is done by force or because of ignorance, what is voluntary would seem to be what has its first principle in the person himself when he knows the particular circumstances of the action.
.. Acting through ignorance seems to be different from acting in ignorance.
.. An action is not properly called involuntary, however, if the agent is ignorant of what is beneficial, because it is not ignorance in rational choice that causes the involuntariness (that rather causes wickedness), nor ignorance of the universal (since people are blamed for that), but ignorance of particulars -- the circumstances of the action and what it is concerned with.
.. it is probably a mistake to describe actions done through spirit or appetite as involuntary.


. chap2
.. Now that we have delineated what is voluntary and what involuntary, we should next discuss rational choice.
.. children and the other animals share in what is voluntary, but not in rational choice, and we describe actions done spontaneously as voluntary, but not as done in accordance with rational choice... the incontinent person acts from appetite, but not from rational choice; while the self-controlled person does the contrary, and acts from rational choice, but not from appetite... appetite is concerned with what is pleasant and what is painful, rational choice with neither.
.... though it does seem closely connected with wish, it is not this either (there is no rational choice of what is impossible, and there may be wish even for things that are impossible, such as immortality). One rationally chooses things that he thinks might come about through his own efforts / that are in our power (ko rationally choose to be happy... sí adquirir virtudes para eventualmente ser feliz)... wish is more to do with the end, rational choice with what is conducive to the end.
.... Neither could it be belief, because belief seems to be concerned with everything -- no less with what is eternal and what is impossible than with what is in our power. Besides, distinctions are made here on grounds of truth and falsity, not badness and goodness, as happens with rational choice... and our characters arise from our rationally choosing to obtain or avoid something good or bad, not from having certain beliefs (belief is praised for being true and we rationally choose what we best know to be good).
.. res: rational choice is voluntary, and does involve reason and thought, and its name too seems to signify something that is chosen (haireton) before (pro) other things.


. chap3
.. we only deliberate about what is in our power, that is, what we can do (vs mth, cosas imposibles, aleatorias, etc.: nature, necessity and chance). we deliberate morte about questions of medicine and of finance, and of navigation than of gymnastics, in that navigation has not been developed to such a level of exactness. Idem more about skills than sciences, since we are less certain about the skills.
.... We deliberate not about ends, but about things that are conducive to ends... If it appears that there are several means available, they consider by which it will be achieved in the easiest and most noble way; while if it can be attained by only one means, they consider how this will bring it about, and by what further means this means is itself to be brought about, until they arrive at the first cause, the last thing to be found.
.. a human being is a first principle of actions. Deliberation is about what he can do himself, and actions are done for the sake of other things, because it is not the end but what is conducive to an end that is the object of deliberation.
.... The objects of deliberation and of rational choice are the same, except that the object of rational choice has already been determined, since it is what has been decided upon as the result of deliberation that is the object of rational choice.
.... each person stops inquiring how he is to act as soon as he has traced the first principle back to himself, that is, to the part of him that gives commands, because it is this that rationally chooses.
.. Since the object of rational choice is one of the things in our power that is desired after deliberation, rational choice will be deliberative desire for things in our power.


. chap4
.. for the good person the object of wish is that which is truly an object of wish, but for the bad person it is any chance thing. This is like the case of bodies, where things that are truly healthy are healthy for bodies that are in good condition, while for those that are diseased other things are healthy.
.... The good person judges each case rightly, and in each case the truth is manifest to him. For each state has its own conception of what is noble and pleasant, and one might say that the good person stands out a long way by seeing the truth in each case, being a sort of standard and measure of what is noble and pleasant.
.... people (hoi polloi) therefore choose what is pleasant thinking it to be a good, and avoid pain thinking it to be an evil... otro caso de hic rhodus hic saltum


. chap5
.. The activities of the virtues are concerned with what conduces to the end; virtue, then, is in our power, and so is vice. Where it is in our power to act, it is also in our power not to act. If it is in our power to do noble and shameful actions, and the same goes for not doing them, and if, as we saw, being good and bad consists in this, then it is in our power to be good or bad.
.... being_good es entrada de arbol? en psuche? si, cerca de happiness pero diferentes: happiness=>being_good not vss.
.. again: human being is a first principle, the begetter of his actions (we cannot refer back to any other first principles beyond those within us... vi tema de phusis como conexion logica).
.... the actions whose first principles are within us will themselves also be in our power and voluntary.
.. todo esto confirmado por legislators. For they punish and penalize anyone who does wicked things, unless he acts by force or through ignorance for which he is not himself culpable, and they reward anyone who does noble things (vi escala politica para casos grises en abstracto: legislators punish an offender for ignorance itself, if he is thought to be responsible for the ignorance).
.. again: in each sphere people's activities give them the corresponding character.
.. If a person does what he knows will make him unjust, he will be unjust voluntarily. It does not follow, however, that, if he wishes, he will stop being unjust and be just. For neither does the ill person become well like this; but he is ill voluntarily, by living incontinently and ignoring his doctors, if that was what happened. At that time, it was open to him not to be ill, but it is no longer so once he has thrown away his chance; similarly, one can no longer recover a stone once one has thrown it, though it was in one's power to throw it.
.. it is not only the vices of the soul that are voluntary; those of the body are too for some people, whom we go on to blame. For nobody blames someone unattractive by nature, but we do if he is so through not exercising and looking after himself (bodily vices in our power are blamed, while those not in our power are not).
.. max-vi la capacidad to judge nobly and to choose what is truly good.
.... a person is naturally good if he has this naturally noble capacity, since it is the greatest and noblest thing, and one cannot acquire or learn it from another; rather, his state will result from its natural character, and when it is naturally good and noble, this will be complete and true natural excellence.
.. again: virtues are voluntary because we are responsible for our states of character (lo matiza tt por algun motivo), and it is by our being the kind of people that we are that we assume such and such as our end.
.... idem para vices.
.. res: virtudes son means, they are hexeis, they lead to actions that are in accordance with virtues (those from which they developed), they are in our power and voluntary, and they are as correct reason prescribes.
..  Actions and states are not voluntary in the same way (actions 100% y states b-menos porque no está tan en nuestro poder su desarrollo y consolidación).
.. avance: arbol ref: Let us now resume consideration of the virtues, and one by one say what each is, what sort of things it is concerned with, and in what way; at the same time, it will be clear how many there are.


. chap6
.. First let us discuss courage. That it is a mean concerning feelings of fear (expectation of evil) and confidence we have already made clear.
.... We fear all evils, such as disgrace, poverty, disease, friendlessness, and death, but not all of them seem to be the concern of the courageous person. For some things, like disgrace, it is right and noble to fear, and shameful not to fear... we ought not to fear poverty or disease, nor in general anything that does not arise from vice or through us.
.. it is only the person who does not fear a noble death, or the risks of immediate death, that should really be described as courageous; and risks in battle are most of all like this.


. chap7
.. though he will fear even the things not beyond human endurance, he will stand his ground for the sake of what is noble (since this is the end of virtue) in the right way and as reason requires.
.. One kind of missing the mark is to fear the wrong thing, another to fear in the wrong way, another to fear at the wrong time, and so on.
.... So the courageous person is the one who endures and fears --and likewise is confident about-- the right things, for the right reason, in the right way, and at the right time; for the courageous person feels and acts in accordance with the merits of the case, and as reason requires.
.. The end of every activity is being in accordance with its state.
.... To the courageous person, courage is noble; and so its end is also noble, since the character of everything is determined by its end. So it is for the sake of what is noble that the courageous person stands his ground and acts in accordance with courage.
.. The coward, the rash person, and the courageous, then, are all concerned with the same things, but are in different states in relation to them; the first two exceed and fall short, while the state of the courageous person is intermediate and right.
.. max-vi making right choices in the fearfull circumstances.


. chap8
.. cita a homero sobre casos de coraje ok: acciones y plabras de hector et al. arise from virtue: they arise from shame and a desire for what is noble (honour, in other words), and aversion to opprobrium.
.... one ought to be courageous not under compulsion, but because it is noble.
.. soldados profesionales vs ciudadanos en armas (mueren por honor sin huir en condiciones desfavorables a diferencia de soldados). Spirit vs courage (arremeter como animal herido, algo de eso hay en coraje pero no vs). They rush into danger driven on by pain and spirit, and do not think of the horrors that await them. Adulterers, as well, do many reckless things because of their appetite.
.... coraje is accompanied by rational choice and directed towards some [noble] end.
.. arbol: json para coraje!
.. People too feel pain when they get angry, and pleasure when they retaliate. But those who fight for these reasons, though they may be good at fighting, are not courageous; they are doing so not for the sake of what is noble nor as reason requires, but because of feeling. 
.... Foreseen actions can be rationally chosen on the basis of calculation and reason, but unforeseen ones only in virtue of one's state of character.
.. tampoco those with hope tienen coraje, ni los ignorantes del peligro obviamente (just confident in danger por motivos equivocados).


. chap9
.. sigue con coraje (abstenerse de placer más fácil que tolerar dolor).
.. the more he is possessed of virtue as a whole and the happier he is, the more pain he will feel at the thought of death. For life is especially worth living for a person like this, and he knows that he is losing the greatest goods -- and this is painful. But he is no less courageous for that, and is perhaps even more so, because he chooses what is noble in war at the cost of these goods.


. chap10
.. After courage, let us say something about temperance, since these two are thought to be the virtues of the parts without reason. Temperance is a mean concerned with pleasures, as we have already said; it is less concerned with pains, and in a different way.
.. excess with regard to pleasures is intemperance and to be blamed.
.. A distinction should be drawn between pleasures of the body and those of the soul. As examples of the latter, consider love of honour and love of learning, since, in each case, when the person enjoys what he loves, it is not his body so much as his mind which is at all affected... temperance, then, will be concerned with bodily pleasures, but not even all of these.
.... We describe as intemperate not those who enjoy the smells of apples, roses or incense, but rather those who enjoy the smells of perfumes and cooked dishes. These are what intemperate people enjoy, because they remind them of the objects of their appetites... These pleasures are touch and taste; but even taste appears to have little or no role to play.
.... So the sense to which intemperance is related is the most widely shared, and seems justly subject to criticism, because it is something we have not in so far as we are human, but in so far as we are animals. To enjoy such things, then, and to love them most of all is brutish.


. chap11
.. In the case of the natural appetites, the number of people who miss the mark is low, and they do so in only one direction, that of excess. To eat whatever is at hand or to drink until one is full to bursting is to exceed the amount that accords with nature, since natural appetite is the replenishment of what one lacks.
.... intemperate people go to excess in all these ways; for they enjoy certain things they should not (because those things are detestable), and if they enjoy the sort of things that it is right to enjoy, they enjoy them more than is right or more than most people enjoy them.
.. The intemperate person, then, has an appetite for all pleasant things, or the most pleasant, and is led by his appetite to choose them at the cost of everything else. So he is pained when he fails to get them.
.. the person who fails to abide by these limitations enjoys such pleasures more than they deserve; the temperate person is not like this, but enjoys them as correct reason prescribes.
.... The temperate person occupies a mean position with regard to pleasures. For he does not enjoy the things that the intemperate enjoys most --rather he actually dislikes them-- nor, in general, pleasures it would be wrong to enjoy; nor does he enjoy any pleasure to excess; nor does he feel pain or appetite at the absence of pleasures, except perhaps in moderation, and not more than is right, at the wrong time, and so on. But things that are pleasant and conducive to health or vigour he desires in a moderate way, as is right, and other pleasant things as well, as long as they are not incompatible with health or vigour, contrary to what is noble, or beyond his means.


. chap12
.. intemperance seems more of a voluntary matter than does cowardice, since it is caused by pleasure, which is to be chosen, while cowardice is caused by pain, which is to be avoided. So it is also more reprehensible, since it is easier to accustom oneself to resist pleasures.
.. children (arbor:paideia) live in accordance with appetite, and the desire for what is pleasant is found especially in them.
.... if, then, it is not going to be obedient and subject to its ruler, it will get out of hand. For the desire of an irrational being for what is pleasant is insatiable and indiscriminate, and the activity of desire will strengthen the tendency he is born with. And if appetites are strong and excessive, they actually expel calculation. They should therefore be moderate and few in number, and in no kind of opposition to reason.



==
Libro IV

. chap1
.. Next let us discuss generosity. It seems to be the mean in relation to wealth: the generous person is praised not in matters of war, nor in those that concern the temperate person, nor again in respect of his legal judgements, but rather with regard to the taking and giving of wealth, and more especially the giving. By wealth, I mean everything the value of which is measured in money.
.... Both wastefulness and stinginess are also excesses and deficiencies with regard to money.
.... again: since generosity is a mean concerned with the giving and spending of money, the generous person will give and spend the right amounts, on the right objects, in both small and large matters alike, and he will do it with pleasure.
.. Things that have a use can be used both well and badly. Riches are among the things that can be used; and each thing is used best by the person with the relevant virtue. Riches, therefore, will be used best by the person who has the virtue concerned with them, and this is the generous person.
.. it is more characteristic of virtue to do good than to receive it, and to do noble actions than not to do shameful ones; and it is pretty clear that giving implies doing good and doing noble actions, while taking implies receiving good or not doing what is shameful.
.. Actions done in accordance with virtue are noble and done for the sake of what is noble. So the generous person will give for the sake of what is noble and in the correct way -- to the right people, in the right amounts, at the right time, and so on, with the other qualifications that attach to correct giving.
.. And this he will do with pleasure, or at least without pain, because what is done in accordance with virtue is pleasant or painless, and certainly not painful.
.. Generosity is spoken of as relative to a person's property. For what is generous depends not on the amount given, but on the state of the giver, and this is relative to his property.
.. We have said that wastefulness and stinginess are excesses and deficiencies in two respects: giving and taking (spending we count as giving). Wastefulness exceeds in giving and not taking, and is deficient in taking, while stinginess is deficient in giving, and exceeds in taking, but only in small matters.
.... give to the right people, and not take from the wrong sources.
.... Someone wasteful in this way seems to be far better than the stingy person for the reasons given above, and because he benefits many people, while the stingy person benefits nobody, not even himself.
.... It is natural that stinginess should be described as the contrary of generosity; for not only is it a greater evil than wastefulness, but people miss the mark more in this direction than in that of wastefulness
.. Those referred to as, say, miserly, penny-pinching, or close-fisted are all deficient in giving, but do not covet the possessions of others nor wish to take them.
.... those who take a great deal of what they should not, from the wrong sources, such as tyrants who sack cities and pillage temples, we call not stingy, but rather wicked, impious and unjust.


. chap2
.. Next in order of discussion would seem to be magnificence, since it also seems to be a virtue concerned with wealth. Unlike generosity, however, it covers not all those actions concerned with wealth, but only those concerned with heavy expenditure; and in this it surpasses generosity in its large scale.
.... Virtue in an achieved result on a large scale -- that is magnificence.
.... The magnificent person, then, must also be generous.
.. The deficiency of this state is called niggardliness, and its excess vulgarity, lack of taste and the like, which are excessive not because of the largeness of the amount spent on the right objects, but because of ostentatious expenditure on the wrong things and in the wrong way.
.... These states are vices, but they do not bring opprobrium, because they are neither harmful to one's neighbours nor particularly offensive. 
.. As we said at the beginning, a state is determined by its activities and its objects; the expenditures of the magnificent person will be large and fitting; so too, then, are the results, since this will make the expense large and fitting to the result.
.... The magnificent person will spend such amounts for the sake of what is noble, since this is a feature common to the virtues. Again, he will do it with pleasure... and he will think more about how he might achieve the most noble and fitting result than about the cost or the cheapest way to produce it.
.... a poor person could not be magnificent, because he does not have resources from which he can spend large sums in a fitting way.
.. Magnificence is found among the sorts of expenditure we call honourable, such as those connected with the gods --votive offerings, temples, and sacrifices-- and similarly those concerning religion as a whole; and all those that are appropriate objects of public-spirited ambition, such as when people somewhere decide that a splendid chorus or warship or feast for the city must be provided.


. chap3
.. A person is thought to be great-souled if he thinks himself worthy of great things -- and is indeed worthy of them.
.... The person who is worthy of little and thinks himself to be such is temperate, but not great-souled; for greatness of soul implies grandness of scale. Someone who thinks himself worthy of great things when he is not is vain; but not everyone who thinks himself worthy of greater things than he is worthy of is vain. And Someone who thinks himself worthy of lesser things than he is worthy of, however, is small-souled (because what they do is not evil, these people are thought not to be bad either, but to be missing the mark).
.... Smallness of soul is more opposed than vanity to greatness of soul, because it is more common, as well as worse.
.. The great-souled person, then, is an extreme with regard to the grandness of his claims, but a mean with regard to their correctness; for he reckons his own worth in accordance with his real merit, while the others are excessive and deficient.
.. If, then, he thinks himself worthy of great things --and above all the greatest-- and if he is indeed so, he will be concerned with one thing in particular (honor [y dar lo mejor a los dioses: the greatest external good we should assume to be what we render to the gods... w-discutible - polémico - vs cristianismo]).
.. honour is indeed the greatest external good => the great-souled person is concerned with honours and dishonours in the right way (it is honour most of all that they think themselves worthy of).
.... The great-souled person, since he is worthy of the greatest things, must be the best person of all. For the better a person is, the greater the things he is worthy of.
.. greatness in every virtue would seem to be a characteristic of a great-souled person... honour is the prize of virtue.
.... greatness of soul, then, seems to be a sort of crown of the virtues, because it makes them greater and does not occur in isolation from them.
.. the great-souled person will be concerned with honours, but he will also take a moderate view of wealth, power, and all kinds of good and bad fortune, whatever happens, in the sense that he will neither be excessively happy at good fortune nor excessively distressed at bad fortune. For he does not even view honour as a terribly important thing (normalmente depende de gente inferior).
.. In truth the good person alone is to be honoured; but the advantages of fortune, however, do seem to contribute to greatness of soul. For the well-born are thought worthy of honour, as are those of power and wealth, because they are in a position of superiority, and superiority in something good is in every case more honoured.
.... People who have the advantages of fortune, but lack virtue, cannot justly claim to be worthy of great things, nor are they rightly called great-souled; these are impossible without total virtue.
.. The great-souled person looks down on others with justification, because he has the right opinion of himself, but the masses do so capriciously.
.. He is the sort of person to do good, but is ashamed to be a beneficiary himself, since doing good is characteristic of a superior, receiving it of an inferior.
.. the actions he is inclined to perform are few, but great and renowned. And he cares more for the truth than for what people think. And he must speak and act openly.
.. he is the kind of person whose possessions are noble but unprofitable, rather than profitable and useful, since this is more indicative of self- sufficiency. And since only a few things matter to him, he is not likely to be rushed. And since he puts no great weight on anything, he is not vehement when he speaks.


. chap4
.. virtud innominada (relacionada con deseo de honores).
.. las virtudes dispose us in the right way towards certain matters; and as in the giving and taking of money there is a mean, an excess, and a deficiency, so also we can desire honour more or less than is right, and from the right source, and in the right way.
.. wherever there is an excess and a deficiency, there is also a mean.
.. It is this state, then, that is praised, in that, though nameless, it is a mean concerned with honour. Compared with love of honour, it seems like lack of interest in it, and compared with lack of interest, like love of it, while compared with both, it seems in a sense to be like both.


. chap5
.. Even temper is a mean concerned with anger. The mean is nameless, and the extremes pretty much so, but we apply the name 'even temper' to the mean, though it inclines towards the deficiency, which is also nameless. The excess might be called a kind of irascibility, since the feeling here is anger.
.... there is praise for someone who gets angry at the right things and with the right people, as well as in the right way, at the right time, and for the right length of time. This, then, will be the even-tempered person.
.... the even-tempered person professes to be calm and not carried away by his feelings, but to be cross only in the way, at the things, and for the length of time that reason directs. And he is thought to miss the mark more in the direction of the deficiency, because the even-tempered person is inclined not to revenge so much as to forgiveness.
.. The deficiency, whether it is a kind of non-irascibility or whatever, is blamed, because people who do not get angry at things that they ought to get angry at are thought to be foolish, as are those who do so in the wrong way, at the wrong time, and with the wrong people.
.... The excess occurs in all these respects -- in getting angry with the wrong people, for the wrong reasons, as well as to a greater degree, more quickly, and for a longer time than is right.
.. evil destroys even itself.
.. irascibile, irritable, sulky y cross peole.
.. it is not easy to articulate how far a person has to go in getting angry, and in what way, before he is liable to blame; such things depend on the particular circumstances, and judgement lies in perception.


. chap6
.. ~friendship (those who associate with others with a view to causing pleasure and pain, siempre con el orthos logos como guia, y lo noble como principio, junto con el de arete)... empieza la politicidad y el lugar de la justicia!). It differs from friendship, in that it does not involve feeling and affection for those with whom one associates: this person accepts the right things not because he is a friend or an enemy, but because his character is as it is.
.... it is not appropriate to take the same trouble over --or to cause the same amount of pain-- to close acquaintances and strangers.
.. he will associate with people in the right way, but it is by reference to what is noble and what is useful that he will aim at not causing pain to others or at pleasing them. For he seems to be concerned with the pleasures and pains that arise in private relations with others; and whenever it is not noble for him to add to the enjoyment of others, or is harmful to do so, he will object to doing it, and rationally choose to cause them pain. 
.. extremos: the person who is pleasant with no ulterior motive is obsequious, while he who objects to everything is bad-tempered and belligerent. The extremes seem to be directly opposed to one another because the mean has no name.


. chap7
.. the mean between boastfulness and its contrary is concerned with almost the same things; and it too does not have a name... son those who pursue truth and falsity in what they say and do.
.. The boastful person, then, seems to be the sort to lay claim to esteemed qualities that he either does not have or has to a lesser degree than he claims. The self-deprecating person, on the other hand, seems to disclaim those he has or to play them down. The person at the mean, however, is straightforward, and truthful in life and in what he says, since he acknowledges no more and no less than the qualities he has.
.... falsehood is in itself bad and blameworthy, while the truth is noble and praiseworthy.


. chap8
.. Since relaxation is a part of life, and one element of this is amusing diversion, here too it seems that there is a form of tasteful social conduct, namely, saying, and similarly listening to, the right thing in the right way.
.... Those who joke in a tasteful way are described as quick-witted (eutrapelos), as if they are quick-to-turn (eutropos)... seemliness is proper to the mean state. It is characteristic of a seemly person to say and to listen to the sort of things that are suitable for a gentleman of good character... we may distinguish the person who jokes well by his saying what is not unbecoming to a gentleman, or by his not causing pain to, or even pleasing, his listener.
.... most people enjoy fun and jokes more than they should. Those who go too far in their humour are thought to be common buffoons who will do anything to raise a laugh, and care more about this than about speaking decently and not offending those who are the butt of their jokes; while those who do not make jokes themselves and object to others' doing so are thought to be boorish and austere.
.. characters, like bodies, are judged by their movements.
.. res: Three means in life have been described, then, and they are all concerned with social interaction in various kinds of conversation and actions. They differ in so far as one is concerned with truth, the other two with what is pleasant. Of those concerned with pleasure, one is found in amusements, the other in the remaining kinds of social intercourse of life.


. chap9
.. shame parece virtud pero es feeling (fear of disrepute)... efecto parecido al miedo: people blush when they feel disgrace, and turn pale when they are afraid of death.
.. it is for voluntary actions that shame is felt.
.. ok para paideia: young people should be properly disposed to feel shame, because they live by feeling and so make many errors, but are restrained by shame. And we praise the young for being properly disposed to feel shame, but no one would praise an older person for having a sense of shame, since we think that he should do nothing to feel shame for.



==
Libro V

. chap1
.. we must consider justice and injustice -- what sort of actions they are concerned with, what kind of mean justice is, and what are the extremes between which the just is a mean.
.. Justice en el sentido politico (cf. chap2 para stdo etico) is complete virtue, not without qualification, but in relation to another person (justice is the greatest of the virtues, in justice is all virtue combined, is not a part of virtue, but the whole of virtue... in so far as it is seen in relation to others, it is justice, while as an unqualified state, it is virtue).
.... We see that everyone means by justice the same kind of state, namely, that which disposes people to do just actions, act justly, and wish for what is just. In the same way, by injustice they mean the state that makes people act unjustly and wish for what is unjust.
.. Both the lawless person and the greedy and unfair person seem to be unjust. Obviously, then, both the lawful person and the fair person will be just.
.. since the lawless person is unjust and the lawful just, it is clear that whatever is lawful is in some way just; for the things laid down by legislative science are lawful, and each of these we describe as just.
.... define ley: arbor:bien-phusis-tipos_bien_natural-politike-conceptos-ley.
.... Law requires us to do the acts of a courageous person --not, for example, to desert our post, run away or throw down our weapons-- as well as those of a temperate person --such as not to commit adultery or wanton violence-- and those of an even-tempered person --not to hit or slander anyone, for instance. And similarly it demands actions in accordance with the other virtues, and forbids those in accordance with the vices, correctly if it is correctly established, less well if it is carelessly produced.
.. justice is complete virtue in the fullest sense, because it is the exercise of complete virtue. It is complete because he who possesses it can exercise his virtue in relation to another person, not only himself. There are many people who can exercise virtue in their own affairs, but are unable to do so in their relations with others.
.. justice is the only virtue considered to be the good of another (Pt. Republic, 343c), because it is exercised in relation to others: it does what is beneficial for another.
.. the worst person is the one who exercises his wickedness in relation to himself and in relation to his friends, and the best is not he who exercises his virtue in relation to himself but the one who exercises it in relation to others, since this is a difficult thing to do.


. chap2
.. But we are looking for the justice that is a part of virtue (no el stdo politico de justicia). Justicia distributiva, después rectificatory y por ultimo conmutativa.
.... when someone is unjust, his action is often not in accordance with any of these forms of wickedness (greedy, cowardice, bad-temper, stinginess), still less all of them; but, since we blame him, it is in accordance with some form of wickedness, namely, injustice.
.... someone who commits adultery for gain and makes money out of it would seem unjust, but not intemperate, while another who does so through appetite, though it costs him and he loses money for it, would seem to be intemperate rather than greedy.
.... all other unjust acts are always attributed to some form of wickedness, such as adultery to intemperance, desertion of a comrade in battle to cowardice, physical assault to anger. But if the person gains by what he does, it is attributed to no other form of wickedness than injustice.
.. Clearly, then, besides universal justice, there is another form of injustice -- particular injustice; it has the same name, because its definition falls under the same genus, both being effective in relation to somebody else. But, whereas the one is concerned with honour or money or security and is motivated by the pleasure that results from gain, the other is concerned with all the things with which the good person is concerned.
.... arbor: bien-phusis-conceptos-justicia_u-vs-p (justicia universal vs particular).
.. What is unjust has been divided into what is unlawful and what is unfair, and what is just into what is lawful and what is fair. What is unfair is not the same as what is unlawful, but differs as part from whole (since everything that is unlawful is unfair, while not everything that is unfair is unlawful).
.. again justice & law (ie justicia universal-politca): law requires us to live in accordance with each single virtue and forbids us to live in accordance with each form of wickedness.
.... arbor:plt&paideia:at_full: law requires us to live in accordance with each single virtue and forbids us to live in accordance with each form of wickedness. Max-vs hbb y modernidad. And the things that tend to produce virtue as a whole are the actions required by law that are laid down for education in good citizenship.
.. One type of particular justice, and of what is just in that same sense, is that found in distributions of honour or money or the other things that have to be shared among members of the political community.
.. Another type is that which plays a rectificatory role in transactions. This type divides into two, since some transactions are voluntary, others involuntary.


. chap3
.. the just is a sort of proportion (equality of ratios).
.... what is just will also involve at least four terms (dos personas y dos partes), and the ratio is the same, since the persons and the shares are divided in the same ratio.
.... what is just in distribution (geometrical distribution), therefore, is the conjunction of the term A with the term C, and of the term B with the term D. And the just in this sense is a mean, and the unjust violates the proportion, since what is proportionate is a mean, and the just is proportionate.
.. What is just in this sense, then, is what is proportionate.


. chap4
.. The other kind of justice is rectificatory, which is found in both voluntary and involuntary transactions (involuntary por fuerza sobre todo, compulsiva).
.. It belongs to a different species from that above. For the just in distribution of common property is always in accordance with the proportion stated above.
.... What is just in transactions is nevertheless a kind of equality, and what is unjust a kind of inequality, in accordance, however, not with that kind of proportion, but with arithmetical proportion. For it makes no difference whether it is a good person who has defrauded a bad or a bad person a good. The law looks only to the difference made by the injury, and treats the parties as equals. 
.... and the judge, since this kind of injustice is an inequality, tries to equalize it (with the penalty).
.... what is just in rectification will be the mean between loss and gain.
.. when the whole has been equally divided in two --when the parties have equal shares-- then they say that they have what belongs to them. It is for this reason that it is called just (dikaios), because it is a division into two parts (dicha)
.. What is equal is a mean between the greater and the less according to arithmetical proportion, because when a certain amount is subtracted from one of two equals and added to the other.


. chap5
.. vs reciprocity as just without qualification (pitagóricos). Justicia conmutativa.
.. When people associate with one another for the purpose of exchange, however, this kind of justice --reciprocity in accordance with proportion, not equality-- is what binds them together, since a city is kept together by proportionate reciprocation.
.. For people seek to return either evil for evil --otherwise they feel like slaves-- or good for good -- otherwise no exchange takes place, and it is exchange that holds them together... soc_civil y contratos.
.. as builder is to shoemaker, so must the number of shoes be to a house. For without this, there can be no exchange and no association; and it will not come about unless the products are in some sense equal. Everything, then, must be measured by some one standard.
.... But by social convention money has come to serve as a representative of demand. And this is why money is called nomisma, because it exists not by nature but by convention (nomos), and it is in our power to change its value and to render it worthless.
.... Let A be a farmer, C some food, B a shoemaker, and D his product equated to C; if this kind of reciprocity had been impossible, the two would not have entered into an association with one another.
.. So money makes things commensurable as a measure does, and equates them; for without exchange there would be no association between people, without equality no exchange, and without commensurability no equality.
.... money makes all things commensurable, since everything is measured by money.
.. We have now described the nature of what is just and unjust. The distinctions we have drawn make it clear that acting justly is a mean between committing injustice and suffering it, since the one is having more than one's share, while the other is having less.


. chap6
.. we are investigating is not only justice in the unequal sense, but political justice. This is found among people who associate in life to achieve self-sufficiency, people who are free and either proportionately or arithmetically equal. So between people who are not like this there is nothing politically just, but only something just by approximation.
.... again: committing injustice consists in assigning to oneself too large a share of what is good without qualification, and too little of what is bad without qualification (injustice=>leyes [justas]).
.... again: justice is the good of another (magistrados are guardians of what is just, they should receive honour and privilege as reward).
.. there is no injustice in relation to oneself. So nothing politically just or unjust is possible here, because they depend on law, and exist only among people where law is natural, namely, those who share equally in ruling and being ruled (recién cuando entra esposa y household propio empieza a formarse la posibilidad de injustice without qualification, falta relaciones entre households y estado).


. chap7
.. As regards what is politically just, one part is natural, the other legal. What is natural is what has the same force everywhere and does not depend on people's thinking. What is legal is what originally makes no difference whether it takes one form or another, but does matter when people have adopted it; for example, that the ransom for a prisoner be one mina, or that a goat be sacrificed and not two sheep.
.. though there is such a thing as what is natural, everything is nevertheless changeable; but still some things are so by nature, and others are not.


. chap8
.. given that just and unjust actions are as we described, a person acts unjustly or justly whenever he does these things voluntarily. So there will be things that are unjust, but not yet unjust acts, unless voluntariness is present as well.
.. again: by voluntariness I mean, as I have said, that which lies in an agent's power and which he does knowingly.
.. max-vi el tema de la wll para naturalidad del estado (political systems are not the same en distintos lugares [a diferencia de eventos naturales que son iguales en todos lados: sol sale por este, envejecemos, etc., varían los sistemas politicos como también los dioses, las regulaciones sobre rituales y todo lo referido a la moneda], though only one is naturally the best everywhere).
.. if someone returned a deposit involuntarily and through fear, we should say that he is neither doing just actions nor acting justly, except incidentally. Some of our voluntary actions we do with rational choice, namely, those that are the consequence of previous deliberation; others, those that are not the consequence of such deliberation, we do without rational choice.
.. So there are three ways in which people can injure one another when they associate.
.... 1. what is done in ignorance is an error, when the person affected, the nature of the act, the instrument used or the end is different from what the agent supposed.
.... 2. when the agent acts knowingly, but without previous deliberation, it is an injustice, but it does not follow that the agents are unjust or wicked, because the harm is not due to wickedness.
.... 3. a person who acts like this (robar, herir, etc.) from rational choice is unjust and wicked. This is why actions done from spirit are rightly thought to be unpremeditated, because the first principle is not in the person who acts from spirit, but in the one who made him angry. If a person harms another by rational choice, he does act unjustly; and it is committing these acts of injustice, when they violate proportionality or equality, which make a person unjust. 
.. again: the dispute is not about whether the action took place or not, but about its justice.


. chap9
.. suffering injustice is not voluntary.
.. suffering something unjust is not the same as being treated unjustly... it is impossible to be treated unjustly unless someone is acting unjustly, or to be treated justly unless someone is acting justly.
.... someone can, then, be harmed and suffer injustice voluntarily, but no one is voluntarily treated unjustly. For no one wishes this, not even the incontinent man.
.. whether it is the person who distributes more to someone than he deserves who is committing injustice or the person who receives it, and whether a person can treat himself unjustly.
.. it is the distributor who acts unjustly, and not always the person who receives more than his share. For it is not the person who possesses what is unjust who acts unjustly, but he who voluntarily does what is unjust, namely, the person in whom we find the first principle of the action -- and this is in the distributor, not the recipient.
.. a courageous person could throw away his shield and turn to run in either direction. But to act in a cowardly or unjust way is not to do things of this kind, except incidentally, but to do them on the basis of having a certain character.
.. what is just is a human affair (max-dificil de prescribir desde tipicidades).


. chap10
.. we have next to say something about equity and what is equitable -- about how equity is related to justice, and what is equitable to what is just.
.. in a sense, they are all correct and do not conflict with one another. For what is equitable, though superior to one kind of what is just, is nevertheless just, and it is not by being a different genus that it is superior to justice. The same thing, then, is just and equitable, and while both are good, what is equitable is superior... what is equitable is just, but not what is legally just.
.... all law is universal, and there are some things about which one cannot speak correctly in universal terms.
.... when law speaks universally, and a particular case arises as an exception to the universal rule, then it is right --where the law-giver fails us and has made an error by speaking without qualification-- to correct the omission.
.. But what is equitable is not better than unqualified justice, only better than the error that results from its lacking qualification.
.. the equitable person is the kind of person who chooses rationally and who does equitable things; he does not stand on his rights in a bad way, but tends to accept less than his share, though he has law on his side. This is the equitable person, and his state of character is equity, which is a sort of justice.


. chap11
.. A person who cuts his throat in a fit of anger is doing this voluntarily, contrary to correct reason, and the law does not allow this; so he is acting unjustly. But towards whom? Surely towards the city, not himself, since he suffers voluntarily, and no one voluntarily suffers injustice?
.. justice and injustice must always involve more than one person.
.. It is obvious too that both acting unjustly and suffering injustice are bad (because the former is to have less than the mean, the latter more, the mean here playing a role similar to that of what is healthy in medicine and that of what conduces to bodily fitness in physical training). Nevertheless, acting unjustly is the worst, because it is blameworthy and implies vice that is either complete and without qualification or nearly so (since not every voluntary act of injustice involves injustice), while suffering injustice involves neither vice nor injustice.
.. By transference of meaning and by resemblance there is a kind of justice not between a person and himself, but between certain parts of him. This is not full-blooded justice, however, but the sort one finds between master and slave, or in the management of a household. 




==
Libro VI

. chap1







==

diferenciar raices, ramas y hojas en arbol tematico.

. chunks sinteticos sobre un tema o reunión de temas, y recorridos temáticos.

. middleware con jsons (tags estructurales) para cada contenido y devuelve html con css.





